#summary How to build the library from source.
#labels Phase-Deploy

= Building the libraries from source =

This page details the instructions to build the libraries from source.

== Prerequisites ==
=== Subversion 1.5+ ===
First, make sure you have [http://subversion.tigris.org/getting.html SVN version 1.5 or higher] installed. Mac users have a SVN client installed, but is outdated - they should upgrade. The [http://www.open.collab.net/downloads/community/ CollabNet binary] seems to be the least obtrusive way to upgrade.

We need version 1.5+ because of its support for the `svn:externals` property. You need this for the build system to work properly.

=== Ant 1.7+ ===
Second, make sure you have the [http://ant.apache.org/bindownload.cgi latest Apache Ant] installed. The build supposedly works with Ant 1.6.5, and it surely works with version 1.7.1.

The build system in large part copied from the GWT distribution itself.

=== Java 1.5+ ===
The build (or rather, GWT) needs at least Java 1.5 to build successfully on all platforms. Java 1.6 might not work on Mac OS X, because GWT uses SWT bindings which need a 32bit Java package. (Bummer, and trust me, I know and I can't help it)

=== GWT 1.6+ ===
Of course, we also need GWT itself. Although the libraries might work with earlier GWT versions, we only test against version 1.6.4/1.7.0 at this point.
Make sure you have the `GWT_HOME` environment variable set correctly.

== Checking out ==
Open a Command Prompt and `cd` to your workspace directory. Enter the following command:

`workspace>` *`svn checkout http://gwt-mobile-webkit.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ gwt-mobile-webkit`*

This checks out the complete project with all libraries in your workspace.
Please note that some parts are repeatedly obtained from an external SVN repository - namely the `build-tools` directory containing the necessary Ant task sources, and the `eclipse/settings` directory containing some configuration files for checkstyle and Eclipse formatting.

== Building ==
To build all library projects:

`gwt-mobile-webkit>` *`ant`*

This will iterate over the (released) libraries and build each one of them to a binary distribution package,
